Well, wonderful to see so many of
the NHS workforce and key workers
taking part in this national round
of applause for everyone helping in
the national effort to save lives
and keep the country going during
these extraordinary times. That’s
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, Brandon Lewis,
former Conservative chairman and
Brexit minister, appointed Secretary
of State for Northern Ireland in
December by Boris
December by BorisJohnson. MP since
December by Boris johnson. MP since
2010, former
December by Borisjohnson. MP since
2010, former Shadow Work and
Pensions Secretary and Ed Miliband,
appointed on Sunday by Keir Starmer
as Shadow Chancellor of the Duchy of
as to, Rachel Reeves, Peter
Openshaw, professor of experimental
medicine at Imperial College,
specialist in immunology and lung
disease and vice chair of the key
committee advising the government on
coronavims,
coronavirus, Scottish rap hip—hop
coronavims, Scottish rap hip-hop
artist and
coronavirus, Scottish rap hip—hop
artist and broadcaster and winner of
the Orwell Prize for his book
Property Safari Understanding The
Anger Of Britain’s Underclass Darren
MoGarvey.
McGarvey. And later, actress and
MoGarvey. And later, actress and
mental
McGarvey. And later, actress and
mental health campaigner Ruby Wax.
Good evening and welcome to the
programme and my guests, my panel,
abbreviated panel, just two of you
in the studio, and our panellists
joining us down the line. As you
know, for obvious reasons, we don’t
have an audience in the studio but
this week we have asked four
questions from people living in and
questions from peopla living in and
around
questions from people living in and
around Uxbridge, and they have
pre-recorded
pre—recorded their questions and
pre-recorded their questions and
will be
pre—recorded their questions and
will be listed to them in a moment
but contact us on social media with
your questions and thoughts and
comments, and I will get them on
this tablet and I will try and feed
this tablat and I will try and feed
them in
this tablet and I will try and feed
them in to the discussion as we go
on. We all saw the clapping for
rarers,
carers, and we want to add our round
of applause. We are suitably
grateful to all the work that all
the carers are doing. I want to
mention, before the questions, that
we have heard the news in the last
few moments that Boris
few moments that BorisJohnson is
few moments that Boris johnson is
out of
few moments that BorisJohnson is
out of intensive care. That’s
out of intensive rare. That’s
obviously
out of intensive care. That’s
obviously very good news. A huge
relief, I imagine. it’s brilliant
you send a reminder that people can
you send a reminder that people ran
recover.
you send a reminder that people can
recover. It’s
you send a reminder that people ran
recover. It’s good
you send a reminder that people can
recover. It’s good to have some
positive news generally but really
good to know the Prime Minister is
on the road to a full recovery. I
was confident he would and it’s good
to know he is out of I see you. What
to know he is out of I see you. what
word on how
to know he is out of I see you. What
word on how soon he might be out of
hospital? I
hospital? Ithink
word on how soon he might be out of
hospital? I think it’s a bit soon
for we have
for we havejust heard he is
hospital? I think it’s a bit soon
for we have just heard he is out of
I see you. He will be following
medical advice, as he has done and
is encouraging everybody else, but I
would like to see him fit and well
and back at work as soon as
possible, but I know he will follow
medical advice and do it the right
way. Tank crew I am sure we are all
glad he is out of intensive care.
glad he is out of intensive rare.
Our first
glad he is out of intensive care.
Ourfirst question is
Our first question is from the
Oxbridge area and from Mervyn Hogg.
Hello, my name is Mervyn Hogg and
I’m a retired statistician. The
Covid-19
Covid—19 suppression package is
Covid-19 suppression package is
beginning
Covid—19 suppression package is
beginning to work but will need to
be maintained until a vaccine is
widely available. To minimise the
risk of rebound clay intermittent
risk of rebound day intermittent
social
risk of rebound clay intermittent
social distancing and other measures
will need to continue. What might be
will need to continue. what might be
the
will need to continue. What might be
the criteria for turning such
measures on and off? How will they
be applied in a safe and controlled
manner to allow businesses and
educational establishments to
reopen? Thank this is a question
everybody wants answering, Brandon.
when might
When might we begin to get out of
when might we begin to get out of
this
When might we begin to get out of
this situation? Well, I have been
involved into micro meetings on this
very issue today, particularly with
very issue today, particularty with
a focus
very issue today, particularly with
a focus on this weekend both a quad
meeting with Simon Coveney and the
first and deputy minister of
Northern Ireland, working across UK
and Ireland, and we have a shared
land bought in
[and bought in Ireland, but later on
land bought in Ireland, but later on
today we had
[and bought in Ireland, but later on
today we had the Cobra discussion
with all of the devolved authorities
and ministers involved, looking at
what we do this weekend. All
evidence at the moment, taking the
first part of that question, is
right. We have to stay focused on
peopla
people staying at home, especially
this weekend, and if we have got the
good weather we are promised, it’s a
bank holiday I think we would all
like a bit of bad weather to
encourage people to stay home,
because we need to stay home. People
want to spend time with family and
friends and I understand that. This
year has to be different, and that
time has to be over the phone or
video conferencing. We need to stay
home at the moment. The first
secretary, Dominic Raab, outlined
eartier,
earlier, later next week we will
eartier, later next week we will
look at
earlier, later next week we will
look at where we have got to. For
the moment, there is no change to
the government position and people
should stay home and continue to
follow guidelines. Peter, you are
obviously advising the government in
terms of coronavirus and the
government makes the decisions you
provide advice. What is your view on
provide advice. what is your view on
how long we
provide advice. What is your view on
how long we might or should stay in
this kind of lockdown? If you accrue
I think it’s vital not to jump ahead
and try to make predictions which
may be
may he can’t stick to. At the moment
it’s clear there are some early
it’s clear there are some earty
signs of the
it’s clear there are some early
signs of the measures taking effect
and it’s too early to start pulling
and it’s too earty to start pulling
any of those
and it’s too early to start pulling
any of those measures back. It might
even be necessary to put extra
measures in place. If we are not
driving the rates down hard enough.
What kind of measures do you need?
what kind of measures do you need?
At the
What kind of measures do you need?
At the moment, the measures that
have been introduced are not as
extreme as they were in Wuhan, say,
where they really lock people down
absolutely, and nobody was allowed
out at all. I am hoping, if the
measures that have been taken so far
are sufficient that we can really
are sufficient that we ran really
see a good
are sufficient that we can really
see a good fall in the rates of
hospital admissions and subsequent
deaths, then would be the time to
start thinking about easing off. But
the other important point that
Mervyn made was that the way we are
finally going to defeat this is by
getting vaccines, and we know that
there are 78 vaccines at various
stages of development, and at least
four in clinical trials, and
ultimately that will be the way we
defeat this, by getting really good
vaccines which can then drive this
infection away. That is the ultimate
hope, but it will take time. We are
all being told that we need to wait
for the pig, and the peak seems to
be a moving target. The Chief
Scientific Adviser, Patrick
Valiance, talked about the peak
Vallance, talked about the peak
likely to be this weekend, that was
back on March the 27th. Today, he
hack on March the 27th. Today, he
was talking
back on March the 27th. Today, he
was talking about we could be weeks
from the highest number of deaths.
It’s hard to know where we are
because it keeps changing. Yes,
well, we
well, wejust
because it keeps changing. Yes,
well, we just have to observe this.
It’s like trying to turn round a
batﬂaship.
battleship. You can stop the
battleship. You ran stop the
engines,
battleship. You can stop the
engines, you can put the propellers
engines, you ran put the propellers
into
engines, you can put the propellers
into reverse but it takes time and
there is an inherent lack in the
system. We have to follow the
science and the facts and we mustn’t
jump ahead and trying dissipate too
much. --
much. —— there is an inherent lag in
much. -- there is an inherent lag in
the system. The
much. —— there is an inherent lag in
the system. The majority of people
the system. The majority of peopla
have
the system. The majority of people
have been great at following the
guidelines but continue to do that
is a really important part, not
giving up on what we have achieved
so far but keeping going and
following those guidelines will be
an important part of making sure we
have enough control over the virus
to get to the other side of it and
give the NHS the capacity and time
to cope. If you don’t see the kind
of behaviour you want
of behaviour you went over Easter,
of behaviour you want over Easter,
peopla
of behaviour you went over Easter,
people staying at home, are further
measures on the cards? We have
really good measures in place and
people are generally following them
and I’d stress the importance of
continuing to do it even over a
weekend where it might be tempting
to try and do something different.
Every time somebody stays home and
follows the guidelines this weekend
all of us as a country are playing
our part in saving lives and helping
the NHS. Mike Hadley has sent in a
message saying, could the government
clarify the law on exercise to
resolve the confusion over guidance?
I was saddened yesterday, he says,
to see an interview with a woman who
said she couldn’t take her child to
the park because she couldn’t get
there and back in 30 minutes. She
isn’t restricted to 30 minutes, she?
No, peopla
No, people should go and get
exercise once a day. What people
shouldn’t do, and as somebody
representing a seaside resort,
people shouldn’t get in a car to
peopla shouldn’t get in a far to
travel
people shouldn’t get in a car to
travel somewhere to exercise. They
should take exercise around and from
where they live, doing it sensibly
and following social distancing. It
is good and important for mental and
physical health to get exercise but
to do it in a sensible and conscious
way. Plan, let’s come back to the
question, which is about how we get
out of this, what measures can we
out of this, what measures ran we
introduce, do
out of this, what measures can we
introduce, do we turn them on and
off.
off, which businesses might reopen
first? What is a safe way of doing
first? what is a safe way of doing
this?
first? What is a safe way of doing
this? What is the Labour view? I
this? what is the labour view? I
agree with
this? What is the Labour view? I
agree with what Brendan has said
about our behaviours at the moment,
and the majority of people are doing
and the majority of peopla are doing
the right
and the majority of people are doing
the right thing but the more we do
that, the quicker we will be able to
come out of that lockdown, so it is
in all of our interests that we
observe the rules. But I think it’s
observe the mles. But I think it’s
important not
observe the rules. But I think it’s
important not to put a date, of
course not, we don’t need a date,
and it wouldn’t be possible, but we
need to start to have some
clarification of what circumstances
would allow us to relax some of
these rules and conditions and
closures and how you would go about
doing that, so what would be needed
in terms of testing, not
in terms of testing, notjust a test
in terms of testing, not just a test
to show
in terms of testing, notjust a test
to show whether we have coronavirus
at the moment. Those tests need to
increase sharply to meet the
government targets, but auto should
the tests to show if you have ever
had it so if you have any immunity
to it, and that along with contact
tracing so we know you have been in
contact with in the period of time
you have had coronavirus, those are
you have had coronavims, those are
the sorts of
you have had coronavirus, those are
the sorts of measures that countries
like South Korea and Singapore and
Germany are looking at, and what
Keir Starmer has clearly said is
Keir Starmer has dearty said is
that he
Keir Starmer has clearly said is
that he would like to see the
government publishing their plans
for ending the lockdown not the
dates. We know that isn’t possible,
but the circumstances in which the
lockdown would come to an end and
how the government go about ending
it. That is what we are looking for
from the government and I think that
is what people are looking for,
is what peopla are looking for,
greater
is what people are looking for,
greater clarity about the
circumstances. Is it possible that
circumstances. Is it possibla that
nobody ran
circumstances. Is it possible that
nobody can really know that at this
nobody ran really know that at this
stage?
nobody can really know that at this
stage? Nobody knows the date of this
ran edit, but
can edit, but we that, at some
ran edit, but we that, at some
point, these
can edit, but we that, at some
point, these restrictions on our
lives will be lifted. But how does
the government envisage that
happening? Will it be when the
happening? will it be when the
number,
happening? Will it be when the
number, when we have testing that
shows that there is only a certain
number of cases detected every day
and we are confident that is all of
the rases
the cases that are emerging because
the rases that are emerging because
we are doing
the cases that are emerging because
we are doing testing on a mass
level, but also that we have the
technology or the resources to put
into the contact tracing, to have a
technology base, so we know through
our smartphone who have been near
to? It’s that sort of information
that the government might need to
start thinking about now so that,
when we are in that position, the
government are able to relax the
mles to
rules to protect lives but also to
mles to protect lives but also to
protect
rules to protect lives but also to
protect livelihoods. There are many
people at the moment who are really
stmggling
struggling financially because they
stmggling financially because they
can’t get
struggling financially because they
can’t get out to work to pay the
bills and put food on the table.
There are businesses that have had
to dose
to close and are worried they won’t
to dose and are worried they won’t
be able to open
to close and are worried they won’t
be able to open again. I think
that’s the clarification people are
that’s the clarification peopla are
looking for
that’s the clarification people are
looking for and we are pushing for
the government to publish. The big
downside of a lockdown is that for
some peopla
some people it’s punishing not only
some peopla it’s punishing not only
economically
some people it’s punishing not only
economically but in terms of the
situation they live in. Custom yes,
and I think it’s quite appropriate
for you to use the word punishing.
We have to look at the ulterior to
the demand to return back to
normality. People, especially those
down the social scale. We have been
down the social sale. We have been
living in an
down the social scale. We have been
living in an iteration of the UK
which has become increasingly
punitive for workers in precarious
jobs, lower class children in
schools, people who rent
accommodation, so if you explore why
many peopla
many people are so keen to return to
many peopla are so keen to return to
work and
many people are so keen to return to
work and they might flout the rules,
work and they might ﬂout the mles,
many of them,
work and they might flout the rules,
many of them, it’s because they have
a fear they are going to suffer in
some way or they are going to be
punished or reprimanded, because
that is what their experience tells
them about the society they live in.
I commend the government ministers
for this real shift in language and
emphasising not the things that are
deserving and undeserving about us,
but actually this talk of
togetherness, the idea that society
is a ship and we are only steering
as safely as the most vulnerable
people on it, that we have got
homeless people now been put into
accommodation. Suddenly, society is
vulnerable because we have so many
vulnerable people. I
vulnerable people. Ifeel
vulnerable because we have so many
vulnerable people. I feel that
vulnerable people. Ifeel that that
vulnerable peopla. Ifeel that that
sort of
vulnerable people. Ifeel that that
sort of language and that shift in
tone, which really does set the
tone, when you think about the
amount of goodwill which has been
unleashed, 1 million volunteers
signing up to help the NHS deliver
stuff to the elderly, politicians
stuff to the elderty, politicians
ran
stuff to the elderly, politicians
ran really
can really make a difference. I
ran really make a difference. I
think
can really make a difference. I
think this needs to extent, the
rhetoric, people need to be told
they are not going to be punished,
they are not going to suffer
unnecessarily, and that ultimately
this is not a pretext for austerity
2.0. If government
2.0. If government ministers bring
into their awareness those sort of
anxieties, that conditioning about
being punished or kept out of your
ﬂat or excluded from school and
begin to
flat or excluded from school and
begin to reflect that in their
begin to reﬂect that in their
rhetoric,
begin to reflect that in their
rhetoric, people might become better
adjusted to this very necessary and
prolonged period of ultimately
isolation at home. Can I ask Peter,
isolation at home. (“an I ask Peter,
what does
isolation at home. Can I ask Peter,
what does the peak and the point at
which we might begin to ease off the
lockdown look like? We have heard in
Italy they are talking about a
certain number of days, a plateau of
a number of deaths, and they are
beginning to think about when they
might ease the lockdown. With all
might ease the lockdown. with all
the
might ease the lockdown. With all
the work
might ease the lockdown. with all
the work you
might ease the lockdown. With all
the work you have done on viral
threats, what does it actually look
like? You often only know you have
reached the peak when you pass it,
so you ran look
so you can look back and see that
so you ran look back and see that
things are
so you can look back and see that
things are declining. We don’t want
to take their brakes off completely
at that point. The point was being
made about the value of testing and
the following up contacts when there
are relatively few cases, which is
are relatively few rases, which is
really
are relatively few cases, which is
really important. It becomes
incredibly important to have good
tests and a good way of following up
those contacts so you can really
those contacts so you ran really
isolate
those contacts so you can really
isolate pockets of infection as the
numbers come down the other side.
Plan, are we talking may be if you
had a plateau of a of deaths for a
week? What are we aiming for?
week? what are we aiming for?
Clearty, just
week? What are we aiming for?
Clearly, just as it takes time to
Clearty, just as it takes time to
slow down,
Clearly, just as it takes time to
slow down, it takes time to speed up
again so, as you take the brakes
off.
off, you don’t see an immediate
jump.
jump, and it will take time for the
effects of easing to show up in the
statistic,
statistics, so the whole thing is
statistic, so the whola thing is
quite a
statistics, so the whole thing is
quite a difficult trip. It’s like
using the clutch going when you’re
trying to steer this thing get the
right amount of easement. Dan, ——
right amount of easement. Dan, --
Darren, you look
right amount of easement. Dan, ——
Darren, you look frustrated. No, I
Darren, you look fmstrated. No, I
wasn’t
Darren, you look frustrated. No, I
wasn’t frustrated. I’ve just been
informed this is life so I was
actually more disorientated. That
was my expression. And, you didn’t
know we were live. I apologise. You
are doing fine so far. And, don’t
worry. Let me read you some other
messages. Simon tailor, we have a
soft lockdown compared to other
countries so why are we even
considering lifting it when we have
the second highest death rate in the
world yesterday somebody who calls
himself only needles, no comment,
why when the country is in lockdown
are there still thousands of people
are there still thousands of peopla
arriving on
are there still thousands of people
arriving on flights every day from
arriving on ﬂights every day from
various
arriving on flights every day from
various coronavirus hotspots without
any checks on arrival? Another
question I would like to go to, from
julia stable. I am
Julia stable. I am an Italian
national in the UK. In the last two
weeks I have been following the
situation here and in my home
country for the many Italians living
here that I know, myself included,
were wondering how much of the
current UK measures have been
informed by what was learned in
Italy. Brandon, we have looked at
the figures coming out of Italy
with, I mean, open mouths in horror,
certainly eartier on,
certainly earlier on, and our death
certainly eartier on, and our death
toll is not
certainly earlier on, and our death
toll is not far behind. What lessons
toll is not far behind. what lassons
is the
toll is not far behind. What lessons
is the government learning?
Customers I think one thing which
was really quite striking, and cut
through a
Image, it was clear from what we
were seeing in the hospitals. Our
experts are talking to theirs and we
are talking to people around the
are talking to peopla around the
world.
are talking to people around the
world. The Chief Medical Officer and
Chief Scientific advisor and their
teams have been looking at what’s
happening around the world, talking
to other countries. One thing I was
talking about earlier today, this
talking about eartier today, this
week
talking about earlier today, this
week we have seen a memorandum of
understanding between Northern
Ireland and the Republic, to make
sure we are sharing experiences and
ideas. But Brandon, talking about
Italy, we all looked at what’s been
happening there. Hang on. Just
happening there. Hang on. just
responding
happening there. Hang on. Just
responding to
responding toJulia’s question. Our
responding to julia’s question. Our
death
responding toJulia’s question. Our
death rate is approaching that of
Italy. Their highest death toll
yesterday. Should we have been doing
things eartier
things earlier not to be in that
things eartier not to be in that
position? At
things earlier not to be in that
position? At all times we have taken
the medical and scientific advice
around what we think is the correct
and appropriate response for the UK.
Some countries are using different
approaches in different regions of
the country. It’s not entirely
straightforward. Other experts will
give a view on that but it’s not
straightforward to do a direct
comparison from country to country
but we’ve taken advice about the
right thing to do at the right time.
This comes back to the previous
question, why we’ve got to be
cautious about looking too far into
the future when we have to make sure
we are following the guidelines
today. This question isn’t
necessarily about looking at the
future but looking back. Peter, you
won of the people advising the
government. What lessons can we
government. what lessons ran we
learn
government. What lessons can we
learn from Italy, or have we learnt
lessons? We’ve learnt an
lessons? We’ve learnt an amazing
amount, not only from our colleagues
in Italy but also from China. Right
from the
from the beginning, the Chinese have
been incredibly quick to help us by
telling us what they’ve tried, what
telling us what therve tried, what
therve
telling us what they’ve tried, what
they’ve found to be advantageous and
disadvantageous. They’ve also been
disadvantageous. Therve also been
very quick to
disadvantageous. They’ve also been
very quick to publish a lot of data
on the management. I would
absolutely give credit to the
Chinese for their generosity,
actually, with all the information
therve
they’ve given us. And also, the more
therve given us. And also, the more
we slow
they’ve given us. And also, the more
we slow down this epidemic, the more
we ran learn,
we can learn, and more trials can be
we ran learn, and more trials ran be
done. At the
we can learn, and more trials can be
done. At the moment there are
literally hundreds of trials going
on, different approaches to
treatment, many of which are
starting to look quite interesting
and promising. Coming back to Italy,
and promising. Coming backto Italy,
they tried a
and promising. Coming back to Italy,
they tried a drug that
they tried a drug that blocks a
they tried a dmg that blocks a
particular
they tried a drug that blocks a
particular element and these
uncontrolled trials looked like they
uncontrollad trials looked like they
had amazing
uncontrolled trials looked like they
had amazing effects on people with
advanced disease, so this has been
put to proper trial in a controlled
way, with placebos and other drugs.
We are learning so much
scientifically about how this
epidemic is unfolding. Can I
epidemic is unfolding. Can Ijust
epidemic is unfolding. (“an Ijust
ask you,
epidemic is unfolding. Can Ijust
ask you, Peter, we are minding your
experience since we have you. Italy
went into lockdown earlier than us.
went into lockdown eartier than us.
I was
went into lockdown earlier than us.
I was struck
went into lockdown eartier than us.
I was stmck by
went into lockdown earlier than us.
I was struck by the press conference
I was stmck by the press conference
today, Dominic
I was struck by the press conference
today, Dominic Raab saying that the
lockdown is working, that it has
worked and is working, it is saving
lives. It begs the question, should
we have done it earlier and
therefore saved more lives? Yes,
very difficult to get the timing
right. We knew the measures that
would have to be taken and everyone
knew what was going to have to be
done. I think the issue was, the
advice we were getting from some
elements of the advisory groups were
that we could only do this for a
limited time to get the maximum
benefit we had to wait until the
right moment and then apply the
brakes and get the best effect that
could possibly be delivered. A very
difficult thing. This is a new type
of vims.
of virus. And really we don’t know
of vims. And really we don’t know
until we try at
of virus. And really we don’t know
until we try at what’s going to be
effective. Darren, from your
perspective, what’s your view in
terms of, have we learnt lessons?
How is it looking from where you are
sitting?
sitting? In terms of comparisons
from other countries?
from other countries? I mean,
sometimes it can be too simple to
sometimes it ran be too simple to
compare one
sometimes it can be too simple to
compare one country with another
country and often we lack a lot of
the context of how those societies
have developed, how they organise
their economies but one thing I’ve
noticed, and this is my own
anecdotal reading of it so correct
me if I’m wrong, but it seems like
societies where inequality is high
are more vulnerable. You can see
are more vulnerable. You ran see
that in the
are more vulnerable. You can see
that in the United States, the only
society that is more unequal than
the UK. I think that accounts for
all sorts of reasons. Obviously
right now, people like to refer to
right now, peopla like to refer to
what’s
right now, people like to refer to
what’s happening in Sweden as an
argument for loosening restrictions
but in Sweden they’ve got higher
but in Sweden therve got higher
levels
but in Sweden they’ve got higher
levels of investment in public
services, higher levels of public
trust in government, higher levels
of personal responsibility because
of those investments over the
long-term.
long—term. Whereas the short—term is
long-term. whereas the short-term is
that lights the
long—term. Whereas the short—term is
that lights the British political
class in this country is really the
chickens coming home to roost
unfortunately. I don’t say that
glibly or facetiously.
glibly orfacetiously. I really
unfortunately. I don’t say that
glibly or facetiously. I really hope
this is a sobering moment for all
politicians of all parties, that the
“Y
way we organise our society is
fundamentally unstable in many ways.
Even Bill Gates, who many think is
in cahoots with some sort of
in cahoots with some sort ofJewish
in cahoots with some sort of jewish
race of
in cahoots with some sort ofJewish
race of aliens from China, nonsense
like that, emerging from a society
where there is very low trust in
institutions, low levels of
education and so on, he said himself
that his foundation and others had
brought to the attention of
governments the risk of pandemic and
not having vaccines developed. All
of the risks he outlined and he said
that if we’d invested a fraction in
that sort of research and early
that sort of research and earty
warning
that sort of research and early
warning system that we do regularly,
warning system that we do regularty,
maintaining
warning system that we do regularly,
maintaining the nuclear arsenal, we
might not find ourselves in the
situation we are currently in. This
is a moment of immense humility for
us who are deeply invested in the
economic and political status quo in
society I can’t think of a better
argument for looking at it again.
Rachel? Going back to the question,
there are
there are obviously things we need
to learn from Italy’s
to learn from Italy’s experience and
to learn from Italrs experience and
certainly at
to learn from Italy’s experience and
certainly at the beginning of this
it didn’t feel like the policies
around lockdown for example came
around lockdown for example fame
quickly
around lockdown for example came
quickly enough. Do you think that
labour
Labour applied enough pressure? Was
labour applied enough pressure? Was
there a
Labour applied enough pressure? Was
there a sense they were missing in
action for the first few weeks of
the crisis because much of the focus
was on the leadership election. In
the end the government had to make
decisions. I know, but Labour have a
decisions. I know, but labour have a
rola to play as
decisions. I know, but Labour have a
role to play as the opposition. Yes,
certainly under Keir Starmer’s
leadership
leadership over the last few days,
Labour’s approach has been around
Laboqu approach has been around
supporting the
Labour’s approach has been around
supporting the government when they
get it right, willing the government
to succeed because it’s in all our
interests for them to succeed but
asking difficult questions to be
constructed. It’s true questioning
constructed. It’s tme questioning
and
constructed. It’s true questioning
and challenge that you get a better
decision made. The point I wanted to
mate, we need to learn from
experience --
experience —— with the point I
experience -- with the point I
wanted
experience —— with the point I
wanted to make, we are learning from
the experience of other countries
but we are rapidly catching up. We
need to listen to people on the
front line, those in the NHS and the
social rare
social care sector. What they are
social rare sector. what they are
saying, what I
social care sector. What they are
saying, what I hear in Leeds where I
am the MP, we need more testing, we
need to be testing people who were
on the front line in higher numbers
and ramping it up quicker but also
and I think most importantly, we
need to give people on the front
line the protective equipment and
clothing they’re crying out for.
clothing therre crying out for.
We’ve
clothing they’re crying out for.
We’ve seen terrible examples, nurses
in Harrow using bin liners to
protect themselves because there was
nothing else and they now have
coronavirus and a doctor from East
London who wrote to the Prime
Minister saying,
Ministersaying, give
London who wrote to the Prime
Minister saying, give us the
protective equipment, and now that
Doctor is dead. I would say to the
government that those who understand
this best are those on the front
line who are delivering the care to
line who are delivering the rare to
the people
line who are delivering the care to
the people who are our friends and
neighbours and loved ones. We need
to ensure that their voices are
being heard in this. When they say
being heard in this. when they say
that we
being heard in this. When they say
that we don’t have the protective
equipment, it’s not to be difficult
and cause problems. I know that you
and cause problams. I know that you
know that,
and cause problems. I know that you
know that, Brandon. It’s because
they are trying to do the right
thing and they deserve the best
equipment to protect themselves and
the people they are supporting in
the peopla they are supporting in
hospitals or
the people they are supporting in
hospitals or social care settings
hospitals or social rare settings
and they
hospitals or social care settings
and they say they don’t have that.
More than anything else that has to
be the number one priority of
government, to ensure that the
people who are dedicating their
peopla who are dedicating their
lives,
people who are dedicating their
lives, because of their vocation,
putting themselves at risk, that we
are doing everything in our power to
give them all the material and
equipment and clothing that they
need to keep themselves safe. We’ve
got a situation at the moment where
about 8% of people in the NHS are
about 896 of peopla in the NHS are
off sick.
about 8% of people in the NHS are
off sick. And probably the same
again in social care. If we ramped
again in social rare. If we ramped
“P
up testing and
again in social care. If we ramped
up testing and gave them the
protective clothing we could ensure
that those on the front line, ensure
that when it comes to an end, we’ve
lost as few lives as possible.
That’s all our priority but we have
to listen to those workers. Peter, I
want to come to you. We will move
onto a different element a moment.
when it
When it comes to testing and people
comment about testing to us time and
time again, were we too slow to get
off the mark with testing in your
view as a scientist advising the
government? I’m sorry, the line has
been breaking up at this end. Can
been breaking up at this end. (“an
you hear me?
been breaking up at this end. Can
you hear me? Yes, can you hear us?
you hear me? Yes, ran you hear us?
Rachel has
you hear me? Yes, can you hear us?
Rachel has been talking about
testing. Were we too slow getting
off the ground with testing? I think
nobody would say we’ve been able to
test enough and to be quick enough
off the mark. It’s incredibly
important to appreciate the brave
work of scientists who have been
developing testing. They’ve been
developing testing. Therve been
working
developing testing. They’ve been
working really hard to build up from
a fairly low base because there
a fairty low base because there
hasn’t
a fairly low base because there
hasn’t been enough investment in
pub“:
public health over the last ten
years. The public health
infrastructure has been repeatedly
infrastmclure has been repeatedly
reorganised.
infrastructure has been repeatedly
reorganised. I think we know now
that we get on with the testing but
it’s really important that its high
quality testing. We know
quality testing. We know that
there’s nothing worse than a bad
test, so we have to have really good
tests. Let me give you a flavour of
tests. Let me give you a ﬂavour of
some of
tests. Let me give you a flavour of
some of the comments that people are
sending. Chris, was it a mistake to
sending. Chris, was ita mistake to
employ the
sending. Chris, was it a mistake to
employ the herd immunity strategy
and then change it to mass
isolation, losing many days? Neal
asks if it’s time for a cross—party
committee for Covid—19, making the
committee for Covid-19, making the
decisions
committee for Covid—19, making the
decisions and taking the politics
decisions and taking the politic
out of
decisions and taking the politics
out of it? Tom says, how much of a
risk is a second wave pandemic as
there was in 1918? Is the government
planning for it? Let me move onto
question from Thomas. Clearly we are
question from Thomas. Cleariy we are
all in
question from Thomas. Clearly we are
all in distress at this difficult
time and people deal with it
differently. Recently a high—profile
differently. Recenﬂya high-profit;
figure
differently. Recently a high—profile
figure travelled with her family to
deal with this in her own way. With
deal with this in her own way. with
such strict
deal with this in her own way. With
such strict restrictions on her
Civil Liberties and to us all, what
does the panel think the wider
impact could be on our mental
health?
ﬂ
I think Thomas is referring to the
Scottish Chief Medical Officer. Ruby
Wax, I want to bring you in. The
impact on our mental health is
something a lot of people are
something a lot of peopla are
talking
something a lot of people are
talking about and there is a lot of
concern about it. What is your view?
concern about it. what is your view?
Yes, there is a
concern about it. What is your view?
Yes, there is a break—up on the
Yes, there is a break-up on the
line. So
line. Sol
Yes, there is a break—up on the
line. So I didn’t really hear the
question. In terms of concerns about
the impact on peoples mental health
of the lockdown, of isolation,
simply of loneliness. Yeah. We are
stating the obvious. People say, we
need more of this. We all know we
need more. But there is an emergency
right now so rather than saying,
should we have done this, you know,
those of us who have mental health
issues, we have been practising this
for years, so it’s almost like the
world is now
world is nowjoining us. Sorry to go
world is now joining us. Sorry to go
on about
world is nowjoining us. Sorry to go
on about what I do, but I have an
onUne
online service called Fresnel cafe
dot org and everyday, twice a day,
there are 100 people each time and
it’s a community of people who
it’s a community of peopla who
express
it’s a community of people who
express themselves, and really
emotionally we are not equipped for
this, and it’s not
this, and it’s notjust about being
this, and it’s not just about being
mentally ill.
mentally ill. I wish politicians
would speak human—to—human at one
would speak human-to-human at one
point. We have
would speak human—to—human at one
point. We have not been trained
emotionally. We don’t understand it
is human to be sad to feel like a
failure that we have avoided those
issues. Along.
SOUND BREAKS UP.
Plan, sadly there is break—up on
Plan, sadly there is break-up on
your line,
Plan, sadly there is break—up on
your line, Rugby. We will try and
fix that, Rugby. Frustratingly, you
are cutting in and out. Darren, let
me come to you. The Chancellor
talked about as all being in this
together but when it comes to the
restriction of civil liberties
Thomas was talking about and the
effect on our mental health, we are
not, are we? It’s much easier
not, are we? It’s much easierfor
not, are we? It’s much easier for
some peopla to
not, are we? It’s much easierfor
some people to isolate and much
some peopla to isolate and much
harder
some people to isolate and much
harder for others,
harderfor others, people
some people to isolate and much
harder for others, people living
harderfor others, people living in
harder for others, peopla living in
ﬂats, that
harderfor others, people living in
flats, that kind of thing.
ﬂats, that kind of thing.
Yes, I
flats, that kind of thing.
Yes, I think most people are going
Yes, I think most peopla are going
to be
Yes, I think most people are going
to be experiencing some level of
mental and emotional discomfort
relative to what they can tolerate,
relative to what they ran tolerate,
so while
relative to what they can tolerate,
so while obviously some people are
so whila obviously some peopla are
actually
so while obviously some people are
actually dealing materially with
more acute circumstances, everybody
feels a certain level of strain and
experiences certain levels of stress
and anxiety, and it’s important to
note that that is affecting
everybody and not
everybody and notjust people who
everybody and not just peopla who
are
everybody and notjust people who
are struggling financially. But the
are stmggling financially. But the
impact of
are struggling financially. But the
impact of isolation compounded with
financial strain, insecurity, as
well as many households where you
have children who have grown up in
that household perhaps with an
abusive parent, active addiction in
the household, the impacts there are
quite severe, and as for
quite severe, and as forjust
isolation in and of itself, social
interaction and connection is
everything in life, from the moment
that we are in the womb, when we
hear the voice of our mother, this
brings online many of our first
cognitive systems. As we develop as
children we get a sense of our place
in the world as well as our
personality. It’s shaped by the
quality of the social connections
around us and, even when we are
adults and living our lives, without
other peopla
other people to connect to and
other peopla to connect to and
physical
other people to connect to and
physical space and run our full spy
physical space and nm our full spy
and get a sense
physical space and run our full spy
and get a sense of usefulness and
helping others and listening to
others and sharing honestly about
feelings, we become very unwell very
quickly, and the problem is we very
often don’t detect how and where we
have become. We to live in our own
heads and to buy into the anxieties
and fears and resentments that often
we ran get
we can get away with in daily life
we ran get away with in daily life
by mnning
we can get away with in daily life
by running out for a job or going on
by mnning out for a job or going on
a long drive or
by running out for a job or going on
a long drive or booking a holiday or
doing some retail therapy. Now, a
lot of things we previously defined
ourselves by have been removed so
it’s very challenging in many
respects. I want to touch quickly to
pluck up quickly, please, because we
have Ruby back.
The case for listening the lockdown
The rase for listening the lockdown
because
The case for listening the lockdown
because of the impacts we are going
to see on people, including the
to see on peopla, including the
mental
to see on people, including the
mental health problems and people
mental health problams and peopla
who are
mental health problems and people
who are not getting treated for
cancer. The difference between all
of the negative impacts of the
lockdown, whether they be medical or
mental or emotional or financial is
that these things are unknown
quantities, so we know roughly how
to address a lot of those things and
at least mitigate them, we can
at least mitigate them, we ran
divert
at least mitigate them, we can
divert resources and raise awareness
and deploy people in the community.
and deploy peopla in the community.
Covid-19
and deploy people in the community.
Covid—19 is an unknown quantity.
Covid-19 is an unknown quantity.
Still
Covid—19 is an unknown quantity.
Still don’t know basic things about
it except the fact it seems to have
evolved specifically to avoid
detection. 0K, Darren... Darren... I
don’t dismiss completely those
arguments for listening the
lockdown, particularly for those who
lockdown, particularty for those who
might be in
lockdown, particularly for those who
might be in some danger, Covid—19,
might be in some danger, Covid-19,
we don’t
might be in some danger, Covid—19,
we don’t know enough about it, we
don’t know what sort of genie we are
letting out of the bottle. Punk
latting out of the bottle. Punk
rocker
letting out of the bottle. Punk
rocker we have got Ruby back and she
is keen to come in. Will understand
is keen to come in. will understand
that, but it’s a
is keen to come in. Will understand
that, but it’s a lot of platitudes.
What
what do
that, but it’s a lot of platitudes.
What do we do that connects people.
what do we do that connects peopla.
What
what is
What do we do that connects people.
What is inspiring is that, when you
what is inspiring is that, when you
see peopla
What is inspiring is that, when you
see people now, they
see people now, they are connecting
see peopla now, they are connecting
in a way
see people now, they are connecting
in a way they have never connected
before, because now we need each
other. We are in mutual trauma, so
it’s no good talking about, of
course, if we lived in a world where
our earty
our early identity was what we did
our earty identity was what we did
for a living and
our early identity was what we did
for a living and we are run by
for a living and we are mn by
social
for a living and we are run by
social media, so maybe we can learn
social media, so maybe we ran learn
what is going on
social media, so maybe we can learn
what is going on now, but I had
somebody on the line today during
one of the Frazzled.org cafe is who
one of the Frazzledmrg cafe is who
said, rather
one of the Frazzled.org cafe is who
said, ratherthan
said, rather than look at the news
the whole time to see the death
toll, pumps up your anxiety, let’s
talk about emotional contingent, you
ran think
can think to yourself, what can I do
ran think to yourself, what ran I do
for somebody
can think to yourself, what can I do
for somebody else today? May be
called who needs help? Maybe get in
touch and to do their shopping. It
will make you feel better even if
you are depressed. By the way, there
will be a tsunami when this is over.
Let’s concentrate on physical safety
now. I
now. Ithink, by
Let’s concentrate on physical safety
now. I think, by being aware of
other people, which we haven’t been
for a long time, that kindness, as I
say, is infectious, so we should try
and create or help somebody. I love
that the Queen came on... We don’t
have a voice that
have a voice thatjust
that the Queen came on... We don’t
have a voice thatjustjust say,
have a voice that just just say,
yes, we are in
have a voice thatjustjust say,
yes, we are in danger, we shouldn’t
go out. We know that, but somebody
to help us understand it is human to
be sad and to feel like a failure.
just be
Just be honest and speak human
just be honest and speak human
rather
Just be honest and speak human
rather than standing on your
soapbox. I think we can make a
connection that might last past this
catastrophe. You talk about the
longer term impact once we get past
fight or ﬂight.
fight orﬂight. You
longer term impact once we get past
fight or flight. You talk about a
fight or ﬂight. You talk about a
tsunami
fight or flight. You talk about a
tsunami of depression, and I hope
not. what
not. What do you think the longer
not. what do you think the longer
term impact
not. What do you think the longer
term impact will be? the longer term
impact is some people are resilient,
impact is some peopla are resilient,
it’s in
impact is some people are resilient,
it’s in their genes, and other
people are vulnerable. There will be
major mental illness and, as I
always say, mental isn’t something
that happens from the neck up.
Mental is physical. It will
breakdown your immune system, make
you even more vulnerable. But I
don’t want to stoke fear. I really
think peopla
think people should try and connect
think peopla should try and connect
to other
think people should try and connect
to other people. I know they can’t
to other peopla. I know they can’t
do it
to other people. I know they can’t
do it physically, but we were always
too busy in our lives before. Maybe
now we have the time to make that
phone call and reach out. Maybe we
could all get the phone numbers of
five other people and call up and
five other peopla and all up and
ask how
five other people and all up and
ask how they
five other people and call up and
ask how they are. Let’s make some of
these possibilities. Brandon do you
want to talk human? I always try but
as a politician I might not succeed.
That point is really interesting.
One thing I found was,
One thing Ifound was, first
That point is really interesting.
One thing I found was, first of all,
I have worked hard to keep a bit of
a routine, that I have been talking
to friends and had calls from
to friends and had falls from
friends, as
to friends and had calls from
friends, as wife has, but I wouldn’t
normally speak to as regularly, and
normally speak to as regularty, and
I think
normally speak to as regularly, and
I think there is an important thing,
and one benefit... At the Home
Office, we also —— we often talked
Office, we also -- we often talked
about the
Office, we also —— we often talked
about the dangers of social media
but technology can be really helpful
but technology ran be really helpful
for the
but technology can be really helpful
for the various apps to connect with
peopla. It’s not
people. It’s not the same as body
peopla. It’s not the same as body
language but
people. It’s not the same as body
language but you can see people and
language but you ran see peopla and
talk to peopla
language but you can see people and
talk to people and reach out for
talk to peopla and reach out for
those
talk to people and reach out for
those whether you are capable to
connect with a friend or somebody
you haven’t seen for a while or
because you need help or you think
they need support, it’s important to
do that, and I’ve noticed that in my
life. A few friends I have spoken to
that I haven’t spoken to for a while
that I haven’t spoken to for a whila
and I
that I haven’t spoken to for a while
and I made the effort and that’s
important. We are never trained in
listening, and I hope social media
now develops ways of saying on
Twitter, I don’t feel well, I
Twitter, I don’t feel well, Ifeel
Twitter, Idon’t feel well, Ifeel
weak today,
Twitter, I don’t feel well, Ifeel
weak today, and everybody will rush
to help you rather than having to
show, look what I’ve got, look at my
status. I think that it drove up a
lot mental strain. Now we can learn.
lot mental strain. Now we ran learn.
Punk somebody
lot mental strain. Now we can learn.
Punk somebody called Michelle
Punk somebody rallad Michell;
Simpson
Punk somebody called Michelle
Simpson has sent a message saying,
totally agree with Ruby. It seems,
if you have already received
treatment for mental health it’s
ready in your tool box for coping
with isolation and this person says,
the impact on mental health will be
huge. Anybody looked away from human
contact for any length of time will
understand. Sharon Chapman says,
what about the mental health and
wellbeing of people who are in
lockdown alone, living in flats or
lockdown alone, living in ﬂats or
apartments?
lockdown alone, living in flats or
apartments? Why can’t they sit in a
apartments? why can’t they sit in a
park? Come
apartments? Why can’t they sit in a
park? Come back to Thomas’s
question, he struck about the
restrictions on civil liberties and
the impact on mental health. I think
the term social distancing is
unhelpful, because we need physical
distancing, and we are doing that
now, that we don’t want to be
socially distancing from people, we
socially distancing from peopla, we
want to
socially distancing from people, we
want to keep up those connections,
because they are really important to
help us through this. I totally
agree with Ruby that a lot of
peoplas
peoples mental health will be very
peoplas mental health will be very
badly
peoples mental health will be very
badly affected by this. Some people
already struggle with mental health
and other people who might not have
and other peopla who might not have
known
and other people who might not have
known that they struggled but
certainly are struggling with it
certainly are stmggling with it
right now
certainly are struggling with it
right now also, I think Ruby’s point
about it unleashing some really
wonderful things in our society as
well, all of this. We are looking
out for our neighbours and friends.
We are phoning family members and
recognising that, actually, we are
not little isolated atoms, we are
part of something bigger, and
looking out for others. I also agree
with Brandon Lewis’s point about a
routine. I’ve got two little
children so I am home—schooling as
children so I am home-schooling as
well as
children so I am home—schooling as
well as everything else. How’s it
well as everything else. Hovfs it
going? I
well as everything else. How’s it
going? I mean, I’m brilliant at it,
not. But it gives you a routine. You
get up in the morning, you do pee
with joe, you
withJoe, you might do some maths
with joe, you might do some maths
and literacy
withJoe, you might do some maths
and literacy and then you let them
play with a Lego. —— you do physical
play with a Lego. -- you do physical
education
play with a Lego. —— you do physical
education with
education withJoe. I’m very lucky
education with joe. I’m very lucky
for the
education withJoe. I’m very lucky
for the I’ve with the people I love
for the I’ve with the peopla I love
but that
for the I’ve with the people I love
but that isn’t the same for
everybody. Some people are on their
own, and that’s really difficult.
other
Other people are with abusive
other peopla are with abusive
partners or
Other people are with abusive
partners or in an abusive
relationship stop they are stuck on
the tenth floor of a block of flats
the tenth ﬂoor of a block of ﬂats
with
the tenth floor of a block of flats
with two young children. You know,
those experiences... It comes back
to Darren’s point. Not everybody is
experiencing the lockdown in the
same way. It depends on your
circumstances, in terms of your
mental health, physical health and
to the surroundings in which you
live, and I think those
inequalities, they are stark in
society, and they are coming home to
us and I hope after this we can
us and I hope after this we ran
build a
us and I hope after this we can
build a different type of society
where we worry more about mental
health and social connections and
tacklc
tackle some of those economic
inequalities which mean some people
have so little and some so much.
Peter, you are listening patiently.
Is the effect on mental health
something you factor in when you
come up with your plans and advice
for the government? Yes, on the
advisory committees there are mental
health experts and it’s really
valuable to have them there. We
should also flag up that there are
should also ﬂag up that there are
quite
should also flag up that there are
quite profound consequences on the
mental health of some of the key
workers and health care workers, in
workers and health rare workers, in
particular, who
workers and health care workers, in
particular, who take extremely
difficult decisions under very tough
circumstances. They have to make
life and death decisions that they
feel really uncomfortable about
subsequently. This has been
highlighted by colleagues at King’s
College London talking about moral
injury in that you have to make a
decision which you then go away and
think about afterwards and you
think, that person could have lived
if only I’d made a different
decision. And they feel a great
sense of loss and guilt. Ruby, you
wanted to add something. I
completely sympathise with that, and
rather than saying, should we have
done something earlier, it would be
done something eartier, it would be
nice now
done something earlier, it would be
nice new if
nice now if somebody could
concentrate a little on what we
should do when the trauma really
kicks in, if somebody could put
their attention on that? That will
be the second or third wave. We will
be mentally shaken. I don’t mean
people with mental illness, I mean
those people on the front line. Can
those people on the front line. (“an
we start
those people on the front line. Can
we start thinking of what we can do
we start thinking of what we ran do
now? Let
we start thinking of what we can do
now? Let me take another question
which is particularly pertinent as
which is particularty pertinent as
we are
which is particularly pertinent as
we are coming up to Easter weekend,
from Louis Kulik. With the lockdown
from Louis Kulik. with the lockdown
taking its
from Louis Kulik. With the lockdown
taking its mental toll on many
members of the public, is it right
for them to use their allocated
allowance outside the home for
things other than exercise? Darren,
there has been so much talk from
police constables and the government
and [oral
and local councils, some of them
and [oral councils, some of them
dosing parks,
and local councils, some of them
closing parks, and we heard the
dosing parks, and we heard the
government
closing parks, and we heard the
government saying, don’t close parks
unless you absolutely have to, if
you have got a back garden, it’s not
so bad. Obviously, you haven’t, it’s
a whola
a whole different story. The
question is about, should people use
their time outside, should they be
able to use it for things other than
exercise, like playing with the kids
or just
orjust getting
exercise, like playing with the kids
or just getting fresh
orjust getting fresh air? What is
or just getting fresh air? what is
your view?
your view? Where you speaking to me?
your view? where you speaking to me?
I was.
Iwas. it’s
your view? where you speaking to me?
I was. it’s very
your view? Where you speaking to me?
I was. it’s very strange being in
this kind of non—environment and
connected to you. The whole thing is
connected to you. The whola thing is
very
connected to you. The whole thing is
very strange.
very strange. Louis Kulik was
asking, is it right, given the
mental toll that lockdown can take
mental toll that lockdown ran take
on peopla, is
mental toll that lockdown can take
on people, is it right for them to
on peopla, is it right for them to
use
on people, is it right for them to
use their allocated allowance
outside the home for things other
than exercise? We have heard
different things about whether
peopla
people can sit down in a park or sit
peopla ran sit down in a park or sit
on a bench
people can sit down in a park or sit
on a bench or they can’t? What does
on a bench or they ain’t? what does
it look like
on a bench or they can’t? What does
it look like to you? I think there
is a risk for people in terms of the
level of
level ofjudgment that
is a risk for people in terms of the
level of judgment that they might
level ofjudgment that they might
experience
level of judgment that they might
experience from other members of the
public. There was a kind of
McCarthyism creeping in slightly
Md’arthyism creeping in slightly
wear, you
McCarthyism creeping in slightly
wear, you know, you have got
middle—class people on Instagram
middle-class peopla on Instagram
doing
middle—class people on Instagram
doing clarinet lessons and yoga,
meanwhile the working class people
were unsure if they have all the
suppUes
supplies they have two survive are
being viewed sceptically on the news
being viewed sceptirauy on the news
on public
being viewed sceptically on the news
on public transport and harangued by
police. I
police. Ithink
on public transport and harangued by
police. I think that is beginning to
factor into how people move around.
factor into how peopla move around.
It certainly is for
factor into how people move around.
It certainly is for me. I think more
clear guidance in terms of what
wouldn’t undermine the general
effort of everyone in society
collectively acting to try and
flatten the curve, as they are
ﬂatten the curve, as they are
saying, but
flatten the curve, as they are
saying, but obviously
saying, but obviouslyjust being
outdoors and breathing fresh air and
getting a bit of exercise does help
immensely. I have had my fair share
of mental health problems and I’m in
recovery from alcoholism and
addiction and there are certain
things I need to be able to
function. I am quite limited right
function. lam quite limited right
in what I
function. I am quite limited right
in what I can do. If I can run for
in what I ran do. If I ran nm for
20 minutes
in what I can do. If I can run for
20 minutes or even
20 minutes or evenjust
in what I can do. If I can run for
20 minutes or even just walk,
20 minutes or evenjust walk, I
in what I can do. If I can run for
20 minutes or evenjust walk, Ifeel
20 minutes or even just walk, I feel
a lot better,
20 minutes or evenjust walk, Ifeel
a lot better, but I know the options
available to me might not be
available to everyone right now. I
hope that answers the question. It’s
hard to hear what you’re asking. You
are doing a sterling job. Some
are doing a starting job. Some
peopla are
are doing a sterling job. Some
people are asking, why can’t I sit
peopla are asking, why can’t I sit
on a park
people are asking, why can’t I sit
on a park bench or
on a park bench orjust lie down on
on a park bench or just lie down on
a piece of grass
on a park bench orjust lie down on
a piece of grass and soak up some
rays? Is coming back to the point
about thinking about... We have been
mentioning about the people on the
front line. What I would say to
front line. what I would say to
peopla is,
front line. What I would say to
people is, every time you do
something that moves away from where
the guidelines are and you do
something unnecessary, you are
creating a bit more risk of another
person been ill and putting more
pressure on people on the front line
to whom we owe a huge debt for what
they are doing, and they are some of
the peoples who need that
opportunity themselves to get out
for some exercise and fresh air and
space. And on, some people might
space. And on, some peopla might
say, why is it OK
space. And on, some people might
say, why is it OK for somebody to
walk in a park for 20 minutes but
not sit on a park bench is part of
it is down to that social behaviour
and the way that people work and
and the way that peopla work and
interact
and the way that people work and
interact with each other. If
somebody goes into a park and is
sitting on a bench or sitting and
sunbathing and simply decides to do
the same, you quickly get to a point
where, peopla
where, people getting it for
exercise in the minimum amount of
time to flatten the curve, instead
time to ﬂatten the curve, instead
you suddenly
time to flatten the curve, instead
you suddenly have people spending a
you suddenly have peopla spending a
lot of
you suddenly have people spending a
lot of time outside sitting down.
It’s getting the balance right,
which is why we are trying to do
this in a way where we ask people to
this in a way where we ask peopla to
use
this in a way where we ask people to
use common sense and follow the
guidelines in a really sensible way
that is thinking of others.
Actually, as I said, at the core is
thinking about people on the front
thinking about peopla on the front
line
thinking about people on the front
line because, every time you follow
the stay home wherever you can other
the stay home wherever you ran other
than that
the stay home wherever you can other
than that bit of exercise or, if you
have to get to work, following the
social distancing and guidelines,
you are playing your part in saving
a life and helping the NHS. If you
are going outside, could you look at
other people? That also creates that
oxytocin, what we were talking
about, the bonding chemical. Can we
about, the bonding chemical. (“an we
not start making
about, the bonding chemical. Can we
not start making eye contact, even
if you are 12 feet away? Everybody
has to do a little inch and then the
world starts to have a ripple
world starts to have a rippla
effect.
world starts to have a ripple
effect. If you can pass a goodwill
effect. If you ran pass a goodwill
on to
effect. If you can pass a goodwill
on to somebody, however you do it,
open the door
open the doorfor
on to somebody, however you do it,
open the door for somebody,
gradually the world gets more
conscious. Can I say one more thing?
conscious. (“an I say one more thing?
If anybody out
conscious. Can I say one more thing?
If anybody out there would like to
come to Frazzled.org cafe you are
come to Frazzledmrg cafe you are
plugging it.
come to Frazzled.org cafe you are
plugging it. It’s open every day at
a good way to talk to other people
a good way to talk to other peopla
who
a good way to talk to other people
who feel like you. I have noticed
when I’m out for my exercise, people
are not looking other people in the
eye, because we are all trying to
keep our distance so we are looking
away and working out how to dodge
peopla. It’s a
people. It’s a very strange
atmosphere. Are you happy, in terms
of.
of, there is some confusion for some
peopla but
people but exactly how they can be
peopla but exactly how they ran be
outside
people but exactly how they can be
outside and in what circumstances?
Ruby is right, we should smile at
each other when we are passing, you
ran see
can see what is happening is that
ran see what is happening is that
peopla are
can see what is happening is that
people are just wanting to make sure
peopla are just wanting to make sure
they are doing
people are just wanting to make sure
they are doing the right thing and
not wanted to stop or pause but to
use that short space of time they
have got. Most people want to do the
have got. Most peopla want to do the
right thing.
Some people some of these stories
Some peopla some of these stories
about hosting
Some people some of these stories
about hosting parties last weekend,
these things are totally
irresponsible, to invite people to
your house, or to congregate in
EWUPS-
groups, because as Brendan says, it
is going to put more pressure on the
NHS and prolong the lockdown for all
of us. The more we can do to abide
of us. The more we ran do to abide
by the mles and
of us. The more we can do to abide
by the rules and only go out when
by the mles and only go out when
needed... I
by the rules and only go out when
needed... I think it’s important
that people can exercise and I
wouldn’t like to see those freedoms
curtailed. It is more strict in some
countries. This is the point, unless
we stick with the rules we’ve got,
we stick with the mles we’ve got,
therll have
we stick with the rules we’ve got,
they’ll have to be tightened, to
therll have to be tightened, to
everyone’s
they’ll have to be tightened, to
everyone’s detriment. That is to
encourage
encourage everyone to do the right
thing, this weekend and in the weeks
ahead because that will ease the
pressure on the add NHS, save lives,
and mean we can come out of this
and mean we ran come out of this
sooner
and mean we can come out of this
sooner than if people carried on as
sooner than if peopla carried on as
if it’s
sooner than if people carried on as
if it’s business as usual. Peter? It
must seem
must seem irrational or punitive.
It’s important that people
understand when they are
understand when they are following
the science and doing things which
are not going to promote infection.
I can’t see what’s wrong with
sitting down and taking a bit of
sun. The sun is very bad for the
virus, damaging its genetic
material. That sounds like a fair
enough thing to do. Brandon? I think
peopla should
people should be getting exercise.
What are we to make of that? People
what are we to make of that? People
talking about
What are we to make of that? People
talking about sitting down. I get
the logic of what he’s saying. The
reason we are saying not to hang
around or go sunbathing in places is
because when one or two people do
it... I represent a seaside resort.
If people come to the bench and they
are relaxing and sunbathing we’ll
end up with the same number on the
beach as we do during the peak
Easter. We cannot have that. We have
Easter. We rannot have that. We have
to say to people,
Easter. We cannot have that. We have
to say to people, get exercise,
follow social distancing but apart
from that, please stay at home. It
will mean that we can come through
will mean that we ran come through
this and enjoy
will mean that we can come through
this and enjoy our sunbathing later
this year, or next year, and the NHS
ran get us to that
can get us to that point. The
ran get us to that point. The
messages
can get us to that point. The
messages you can go outside but you
messages you ran go outside but you
have to keep
messages you can go outside but you
have to keep on the move? Unless
you’re going to work, have the
exercise, that’s the important part
for mental health, but that’s what
it’s for. Especially this weekend
when it will be tempting. And very
warm. I think we’ve got some
clarity. Our
clarity. Ourtime
warm. I think we’ve got some
clarity. Our time is up,
clarity. Ourtime is up, I’m
warm. I think we’ve got some
clarity. Our time is up, I’m afraid.
We could talk about this for some
time. Question Time will be back
next week, at 8pm on BBC One.
Tonight the recorded questions came
from Uxbridge. Next week we’d like
to hear
to hearfrom people in and around
Wolverhampton. We can’t go there but
we’re doing our best to there
virtually. There’s been an unusually
high number of coronavirus cases
there
high number of coronavirus rases
there so
high number of coronavirus cases
there so we like to hear from people
there. I know it’s not the same as
coming to the programme and getting
a free cup of tea
a free cup of tea on the BBC and
being part of the event! You are
part of what makes the programme
special so we’d like to hear from
you. If you live in Wolverhampton or
around, apply in the usual time, go
to the Question Time website. If
asked we will ask you to record your
question and we will play it as a
pre-recorded
pre—recorded clip. You can carry on
pre-recorded dip. You ran carry on
the
pre—recorded clip. You can carry on
the conversation with
the conversation with Adrian Charles
on five live. For now, thank you to
the panel, for Peter, Ruby and
Darren. And to you at home for
watching. From Question Time,
goodbye.
My mum, she’s like this mix of being
super—strict, but really shy.
Full of madheads in here.
And my dad, he’s really sweet.
GLASS SMASHES
where’s my keys! ?
0h, they sound lush.
A little bending of the truth
never hurt anyone, did it?
What?
The forecast is black ice
and you are on slippery skis.
CAR HORN BLASTS
Get out of the way!
Just leave it, it doesn’t matter.
It does matter, Lydia.
I’m sorry. Never apologise to me,
OK? I’m your daughter.
BBC Three’s new comedy drama...
All episodes streaming now.
This programme contains
some strong language
They say his deaths a suicide.
What if he was murdered?
By speaking out against your father,
Yaro is forfeiting any money
he was promised.
Our priority no longer lies
in the appeasement of Noughts.
It’s time we regained order.
All I’m asking is that you
meet with Dorn.
You’ll find it here.
Truth sometimes comes at a cost.
I can’t love you —
not with who I am —
or where I’m going.
Callum!
UPBEAT MUSIC PLAYING
Everybody come together.
Simmer down, guys.
100 years
and still thriving...
..all down to me.
No, seriously, guys,
100 years —
36,500 papers,
dominating the homes
and the minds of the nation.
ALL: Yes!
So, to us...
ALL: To us!
..making the most—read
publication in the country.
ALL: Yes!
Now, let’s party!
And, guys, listen —
I need everybody here
first thing tomorrow morning,
compos mentis. No excuses, yeah?
Come on. Leave him — that’s enough.
Let’s go.
Let’s go! Go!
Get down.